hey you know for airplanes the sky is
literally the limit planes can lift off
vertically or from a ship they can fly
upside-down and spin in barrel rolls but
how they do all of this and what limits
they really have you'll find out right
now how are some planes able to fly
upside-down
most airplane wings aren't supposed to
provide lift when they're upside down
and require a pilot to aim the nose of
the plane upwards to do so but fighter
jets and aerobatic planes have
symmetrical wings which can lift a plane
up in any position how does water
landing work very carefully float planes
have basically two dinghies replacing
their normal landing gear though they
have small wheels for occasional
landings on the ground a sea planes
lower part of its fuselage has a boat
like design and doesn't need any gear at
all but even a normal airplane can land
on water in an extreme case it's called
ditching and it's one of the hardest
things a pilot can perform how sturdy
are black boxes well first they're more
like orange boxes because they're easier
to find if they have a vibrant color
they're usually placed near the tail of
a plane because here they won't take as
much damage during a possible accident
they can endure the temperature of up to
2,000 degrees and 5,000 pounds of
pressure enough to melt most soft metals
and crush a car
how do stealth planes work very
secretively to detect an airplane a
radar must send electromagnetic waves to
it and then receive this signal as it
reflects and comes back stealth planes
can absorb waves into their surface
coverage or they can reflect them in
unpredictable ways so the signal will be
unreadable for a radar this is why most
stealth airplanes have these strange
angular shapes how does autopilot work
all it requires is a destination point
and a route everything else depends on
complex calculations and sensors for
example if an altitude is set at some
point by a computer sensors will track
if wings are lower or higher than that
and adjust them accordingly
most of the time pilots land and take
off manually why don't we have flying
saucers yet good question
people actually tried to come up with
one and there was more than one
prototype such as the vza avrocar or the
Vaught v 173 both were experimental
airplanes that showed a plate like
design and its inefficiency vz9 couldn't
even rise higher than five feet above
the ground more like a hovercraft why do
some planes have to level wings those
are called biplanes and their engines
are fairly weak which is why regular
wings can't provide enough lift for a
stable fly the solution was to increase
the wing area and keep them from being
too heavy this is where double wing
construction comes from why do we still
use propeller driven airplanes not only
because it's cheaper to make one but
also because airplanes with jet engines
are only effective at high speed and
altitude for example it would be tough
to use jet engine airplanes in
agriculture for spring weeds or
fertilizing because the aircraft needs
to move relatively slowly and close to
the ground why don't we use airships
they have huge volumes and can't be
aerodynamic enough to move fast in the
air
strong winds would drag them too much
and they simply can't compete with
airplanes yet there are new airships
like airlander 10 which combines
Zeppelin and airplane features to take
off like a plane and then glide high
like an airship would will we fly on an
electric airplane soon there are over 14
different projects in development right
now that strive to design and build
electric airplanes from Aero taxis with
only two seats to 150 Cedars some of
which are already going through flight
tests they're supposed to fly over short
distances only as lithium based
batteries won't allow much more than
that
why do planes leave trails and no this
is not a toilet-paper question there is
water in the airplane engines exhaust
and when it mixes up with cold wet air
it spreads thinly and freezes into tiny
ice crystals the resulting line is
called a contrail a plane flying in dry
air won't leave these trails why do some
planes have rounded noses and others
have pointy ones airplanes with blunt
noses fly at speeds lower than the speed
of sound they don't need to deal with
shockwaves produced by breaking the
sound barrier this is what pointed nose
r4y do you think the Wicked Witch of the
West could fly so fast
yes her pointed nose really
why our pilots more worried about hot
days than stormy ones well it's hard for
an airplane to lift itself up in hot air
it gets less dense and flows freer while
wings need dense air to climb up this is
why the safest time to fly during summer
is in the morning when the air is still
cool
how fast can an air racing plane fly and
spin racing planes aren't made for
long-distance flights or service so they
can focus on high power packed in a body
as light as possible with this they can
fly at more than 260 miles per hour and
spend 420 degrees in one direction can
an airplane go into space well the
higher the plane goes the less dense air
around it becomes at some point it gets
impossible for a plane to lift itself
higher because there's simply no air for
this the highest altitude a commercial
airliner ever climbed was 60,000 feet
achieved by a Concorde supersonic jet
how to airplanes withstand lightning
strikes I would say that every airplane
gets hit by lightning eventually but the
fuselage of an airplane is tight and
made of aluminum this makes the
Lightning run along the outside of the
plane and not go any deeper the worst it
can do is slightly mess with onboard
instruments for a second why should you
never use laser pointers around pilots
and airplanes even if you accidentally
flash a pointer into the pilots eye
you're in big big really big trouble not
only because it will make their work
much harder but also because it's
totally illegal and heavily punishable
in some countries and it's really stupid
why does plain food taste a bit bland
this is not the foods fault it's your
tongue that can't appreciate tastes on a
plane a combination of high pressure and
dry air numbs your tastebuds and prevent
you from feeling the real taste of food
how does turbulence occur most common
causes are updrafts flying into a cloud
extreme heat or meeting a strong hail if
a pilot sees that it's going to get
shaky they will try to adjust altitude
or request a change of course not for
safety but only for passengers comfort
since turbulence is mostly safe for an
airplane can it be too cold outside to
fly jet fuel has a bad habit to freeze
at minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit but up at
30,000 feet up in the sky it's even
colder the fuel doesn't become ice
because an airplane produces enough heat
itself if there is a way of keeping ice
away from the wings with antifreeze and
to keep the fuel liquid an airplane can
fly in extremely cold environments
without problems way to airplanes fly in
circles above airports sometimes just to
show off
now that really those circles are
holding patterns sometimes several
airliners arrive at one destination at
the same time but they can't land
together while one plane is landing
another has to fly in this holding
pattern and wait for its turn before
emergency landings this pattern also
helps to burn fuel and lower the weight
of the plane why are most airplanes
white the white paint job on an airplane
helps to reflect sunlight and so
decrease heating where no clouds can
save a plane from the Sun plus it's much
easier to spot imperfections and cracks
on white covering
how do jets take off from aircraft
carriers well first the ship itself
moves into the wind so this generates
more airflow for the Jets wings to start
lifting sooner then there are catapults
on carriers that fling the Jets off the
deck to gain incredible speed in mere
seconds wahoo
and finally the gist themselves are
designed to accelerate as quickly as
possible look like fun hmm think I'm
gonna barf
how does some planes take off vertically
planes with vertical takeoff capability
are equipped with engines that can be
aimed down and so they don't need
runways to take off and land
this is incredibly taxing on pilot
skills and also costs a lot of fuel so
much so in fact further research in this
field was stopped at one point ah the
ups and downs of air travel
[Music]